You got a word here, assemblids. Yes,
that sounds like somebody just made that
up. Once we figure out how to make some
of this brain region, putting them
together essentially was unleashing like
new forces of self-organization, which
is really what the brain does. I mean,
the brain builds itself at the end of
the day. Very often when we do this
experiments in the dish, you better know
like the instructions and provide them
at the right time. You don't start
building a new house until you really
have a very clear plan and the tools. In
biology actually, you know, cells come
with the instructions. That's why we
call this process selforganization. So
if you were around in Frankenstein's
day, Frankenstein would could have just
been a regular Joe. Yeah. On the street,
he been like, "Hey, what's going on?"
[Music]
This is Star Talk. Neil deGrasse Tyson,
your personal astrophysicist. And today
it's going to be special edition, which
means we got Gary O'Reilly. Gary Neil.
All right, man. Yeah. Always good to
have you. Pleasure is mine. Very good.
and Chucky baby. Hey babe. All right.
Not good to have me I guess. Okay. Okay.
Good to have you
Gary. Always good to have you. And and
Chuck. Yeah.
So you got a word here. Assemblids. Yes.
That sounds like somebody just made that
up. Just assembled it. Yeah.
Assembloids. Well, this is a show on
assemblids. What can you tell us about
it? All right. Not that long ago, we did
a show on synthetic biological
intelligence or if you prefer organoid
intelligence. Organoid. Yes, I remember
right now. And those are if I remember
like 3D cultures to build brain-like
structures for bio computing, right? So
that's what that was being used for for
our future overlords.
All right. So this was putting biology
onto technology. This is something
different. However, it's based around
the organo intellig. But this now
becomes organoids assembling together.
Oh, now that then selforganizing
organizing organoid. So, our guest
today. All right. Well, we just Okay,
we're getting into it, baby. And what
could go wrong?
Let's not do that question just yet.
I'll save that for the end. Okay, go. So
our guest today had the great idea of
trying to get these organoids to work
together and coined the phrase
assemblid. So assembloids is down to our
guest work. Now these assemblids can
help us uncover the biological mysteries
of our own minds. Mhm. So are we just
clumps of cells in the big petri dish we
can call life? Yes. I think sometimes
speak for yourself. Sometimes it can
feel like that. So um let's find our
guest. You say in the petri dish of
life. Yes. That was beautiful. Was
You're welcome. I'm just reading it. And
um
so let's let's see what mysteries have
been sold. What mysteries are still out
there and our guest now. So uh drop in
on our guest. Yes, please. So we have
Sergio Pasca. Sergio, welcome to Star
Talk. So it's great to be here. Thank
you so much for having me. Yeah. So
you're a neuroscientist on Star Talk
special edition. We love neuroscientists
because that there's a serious future
opening up right before our eyes. Yes,
it is in plain in plain sight. A fresh
frontier. Fresh frontier. Uh a stem cell
biologist. Stem cells have been pretty
much in the news on and off the past
couple of decades. A professor of
psychiatry and behavioral sciences at uh
Stanford. When I think about this,
however, I think of a psychiatrist or
behavioral scientist. They're just
putting someone in a couch or observing
their behavior. This sounds way more
invasive than what it is you're doing.
This sounds very puppeteerish.
Exactly. And you also been teding.
That's good. So, we can dig you up in
the TED archives. Correct. Yeah.
Excellent. And and here in 2023, you
made a knight of the Order of Merit of
Romania. Oo. All right. So let's get
back to basics here and put us all on
the same page with what an organoid is.
So an organoid is a clump of cells that
is cultured in a dish in a
three-dimensional structure and the name
actually organoid which is organike is
supposed to suggest that it resembles an
organ. So it's similar in some function.
Of course, it's not a replica of an
organ, but is supposed to model features
of an organ.
A scaffold of an organ. Well, I guess
like parts of an organ or like parts of
the function of an organ. So, for
instance, for the brain, it's not really
a brain in miniature. It's not the
entire organ in miniature, but it would
be like parts or aspects of the brain uh
that are being modeled. And by the way,
asteroids, they show up as stars on a on
a in a photo because they're so tiny,
right? But they're not stars. So that
they're asteroids. Little star. Exactly.
So it's organike, I guess. Let's say you
like starlike. Mhm. Oh, wait. Oh, so
those are organoids. Yes. All right. And
so now, so now you organize them in some
way or do they self-organize? You give
them instructions that they follow.
Well, I guess all of this work to be
honest like started with the ability to
actually even grow stem cells in a dish.
If you were to like step back and think
like how this all came together, you
know, stem cells as you know generally
are derived, you know, from an embryo,
right? Uh and that has been certainly
like very difficult uh to do studies.
Then about it was certainly politically
fraught with issues related to the
ethics of using human human embryos and
and that was a big issue until you guys
figured out or your people figured out
how to create stem cells without regular
cells out of regular cells. So this is
so that happened 20 years ago almost 20
years ago 19 years ago uh when a
Japanese scientist Shina Yamanaka made
this like breakthrough discovery where
he actually showed that you could
actually turn any cell that we have in
our body that is already differentiated
so like back in time to look like those
embryionic stem cells and so almost like
a you know sort of like cellular alchemy
so to speak right because it was like we
always thought that it's a one-way treat
uh development is a one-way street. You
never sort like go back. Just so we're
on the same page, stem cells, while it's
always in the news, just as a reminder
to the non-biologist, it is a kind of
cell that you under the right conditions
can turn into any other cell of the
human body. Is that correct? Exactly.
Yeah. Nerve cells, muscle cells. Yeah.
And and that's why they're prevalent in
the embryo because the embryo is
manufacturing the the all the cells,
right? Okay. Got stem cells have have
two properties. They can turn into any
other cells and they can renew
themselves. So they can stay as stem
cells for a very long time. And of
course there are multiple levels of stem
cells. The first ones are the ones that
are the most powerful. They can turn to
everything. And then as you progress in
development, they become more and more
restricted in what they can do. But the
ones that are real in the beginning uh
are you know the ones that you would
like to have so that you can ultimately
guide them to become different other
cells and tissues in in the body. Wait,
so you put them in a time machine? Is
that that box that's sitting behind you?
You say that but how how is that
possible? How how are you able to take a
brain cell that you've cultured and dial
it back to a stem cell and then bring it
into whichever area you need to bring it
to. So it was is really a brilliant idea
uh that build on work that was done
before and uh essentially the experiment
was like very simply done. He just
looked at the main genes that are
expressed in the stem cells and then he
said let's see which ones are really
important. So he took them and he put
them in a actually in the skin cell.
Took a skin cell and starting putting
various combinations of those genes that
are very strongly present in those stem
cells. And through this
combinatorial you know experiment he
found out four that if you put at the
same time you know pretty much you know
confuse the cell so to speak and the
cell becomes reprogrammed. That's why we
call it cell reprogramming because the
cell is really reprogrammed to that
state and it turns out that they have
all the properties of those embryionic
stem cells but you can make them from
anybody in a non-invasive way and of
course you can store them you can ship
them to others and so that was really a
breakthrough for the field because that
opened up the possibility for the first
time that you could get stem cells from
anybody from any patient and then start
to study it. uh in addition I was
finishing my clinical training around
that time and really to a large extent
like dropped everything because my uh
expertise I'm a physician by training my
expertise is actually autism spectrum
disorders and neurodedevelopmental
conditions and I was like incredibly
frustrated by the lack of models to
study this disease we you know there are
animal models but you know what is an
animal model of autism right I mean that
has been so like a a challenging aspect
we can't really access the human brain
right I mean that is sort of like the,
you know, this curse, this unbearable
inaccessibility of the human brain. I
mean, it's behind the skull and unlike
any other organ, you can't just like go
there, get a biopsy and study it. So, we
were sort of like blocked, so to speak,
locked into this state where we couldn't
really make progress. And uh yeah, so
about, you know, 16 17 years ago, I I
came to Stanford meme by the like
potential of this uh stem cells that we
can make, which we called induced plur
potent stem cells.
and then started thinking could we
actually turn them into neurons from
patients and then study whatever defects
are characteristic of that disease but
outside of the human body and that's
really what enabled uh you know all of
this and initially so that blew open the
whole field at that point well exactly
it open the whole field and you know in
the beginning just to make it clear it
was you know I mean I got all the grants
and all the fellowships rejected all the
time as this being absolutely insane you
know like how can you actually like make
neurons in a dish and then even expect
to find something from a disease that is
so mysterious, right? Think about I mean
autism is a complex disease of social
behavior. What are you going to see
actually in a dish?
So I mean we'll get back probably to
this conversation but it was actually
key for us to focus on a disease where
we actually like knew what to expect
sort of like to calibrate and that sort
of like started that uh you know this
entire journey and in the beginning most
of these experiments were very simple
you know you would take the stem cells
from patients uh that we derive in a
dish and then kind like spike in various
molecules in a dish uh so like guide
them to try to become neurons and those
differentiation experiments were like uh
easy but then About 10 years ago, it
became clear that we're going to need
more of the three-dimensional aspect of
development to really capture even more
complex features of the brain. And
that's how some of these 3D cultures
which are now known as organoids appear
first. So, if the neurons are
self-organizing, a how do they know that
they're self-organizing? And how do they
know where to go and be organized?
That's a very good question. And you
know I mean self-organization is is a
remarkable force of nature and biology
right then and very often when we do
this experiments in a dish to be honest
for for very long time I was so like
thinking like an engineer in the sense
that oh if you want to build something
in a dish let's say a circuit you know
you better so like know the blueprint
you better know like the instructions
and provide them at the right time and
so you don't start building a new house
until you really have a very clear plan
and the tools but what we realize with
time is that in Biology actually you
know cells come with the instructions
you know so once you make a specific
cell actually comes with the instruction
and then by connecting let's say to
another cell it reveals another set of
instructions right and another one and
another one and that's why we call this
process self-organization so which
really is the formation of order
structured from you know relatively
homogeneous elements which which by the
way like talking of physics and
chemistry this was known from the 19th
century I mean There are classic
experiments that show you know that
molecules organize quite beautifully.
You know the riot Bernard convection I
guess is the classic example but biology
just brings it to the next level and now
organizes cells pretty much on their
own. So what you're doing is you're
bringing these together in this culture
this 3D culture where the message and
directions are already resonant inside
of the cell. So when you put them
together or group them, they basically
do what they were going to do anyway.
Exactly. Okay. With with uh with one
detail, which is we have to make the
parts, right? If you don't have the
right parts, then of course they won't
know what to do. What to do. Actually,
what we spend a lot of time generally is
making the parts. And let's think about
the human brain. I mean, the reason why
the human brain is remarkable is because
it has all these parts which are very
different. You know unlike let's say the
liver the liver is relatively
homogeneous right a few cell types kind
like any part is like any other you look
at the brain and now you have thousands
of cell types I mean the recent
estimates you know said that there are
probably 2,000 cell types just in the
human brain right scattered through all
these nuclei and regions and the
remarkable abilities of the brain really
result from the cells interacting with
each other so in the early days like you
know 15 years ago we were making just a
few cells like a few spinal cord neuron
cells or maybe a few cortical neurons,
but then we've never really leveraged
the ability of the cells to connect with
each other. And so that's where
essentially assemblids came where once
we figure out how to make some of the
cell types, some of these brain regions,
putting them together essentially, you
know, was unleashing like new forces of
self-organization, which is really what
the brain does. I mean, the brain builds
itself at the end of the day, you know,
if you think about it, right? And and
and it reorganizes itself. Like if you
damage a part of your brain, it will
reorganize itself so that that function
might be taken up someplace else. At
least early in development. Yes. Early
in development, it will do so. And then
the more you progress, the the you know,
the the less you can the less that
happens, right? What if you leave your
cultured brain cells in the dish for 9
months, a year, what happens to them
then? Do they just take care of business
on their own or do they just fade away?
something crawls out of the petri dish.
There you go. You have the smartest dish
in the world. It'll chase you down the
corridor. Get that fork away from me.
But that was something actually, you
know, really fascinating. We discovered
like, you know, almost 10 years ago. So
at one point we were, you know, my lab
was still like in the early days and at
one point, you know, we realized that
well, I mean, it's very expensive
experiment. you have to keep feeding the
cells. And I was running out of money in
the lab. And so I told everybody in the
lab, I said, "You better go in your
incubators and like make sure that
you're not maintaining cultures that we
don't need. We need to focus. We need to
save money." And then somebody in the
lab comes and says, "Oh, should I also
like remove the ones that are like 300
days old?" I was like, "What do you mean
like 300 days old?" It's like, yeah, I
mean, you know, we you know, I I knew
that we were keeping them for very long
periods of time, but I had no idea that
we could keep them for such a long
period of time. And it turns out that
once you make this cluster of cells and
you know sort of like I wish I could
show you. I wish you were here in the
lab and I could show you. Maybe I can
try. They look something like this. All
right. I see it. They're a lot. They're
still like fixed. You see? So they're
like relatively large clumps of cells.
They're floating in the media in the
incubators. You keep going and change
media. And then at one point we realized
we can keep them for very long periods
of time. In fact, we maintain now the
longest cultures that have ever been
reported. Like you can keep them for
years. And so now the question was are
they stuck in development? Are they
progressing in development? And through
a series of papers we discover something
really fascinating. It's like they
actually keep track of time really well.
So well that once they actually arrive
at about 9 months of keeping them in a
dish, they actually transition in terms
of their gene expression and some of the
properties of the cells to a post-natal
brain. So it's almost like they know
that birth should happen. Wow. There's
almost like we think that there is some
sort of internal clock that keeps track
of time. Is this the brain clock that
I've read about? Yeah, this is the brain
clock. Exactly. I'm fascinated now that
these cells have the ability to
understand basically a calendar. I mean,
because they're not they're not
observing the the sun going across the
sky a day and a night. Yeah. So, what's
what's what's doing the tech?
So, I mean, you may think that this is,
you know, surprising, but if you think
about it, it's not that surprising. I
mean, every time you make a human,
you'll always make it in like 280 days.
And and here's the interesting thing. If
you take mouse stem cells, okay? Or we
have like chimp stem cells and you
differentiate them the same way in a
dish, they'll finish development in
their own time in the same but and and
that t that same time period reflects
the gestation period of a chimp or
mouse. like it will be three weeks for
the rat and it will be like you know
whatever is for so this is I mean
evolution has actually selected you know
very well like the periods of
development and so they're intrinsic to
the cells I think what we what was
surprising for us was that this happens
also outside of the of the body right
outside of the uterus of course this is
not to say that all aspect of
development are recapitulated I mean
there are all kinds of things that are
coming right all kind of informations
that are coming that are shaping
development and we know that the more
you invest In human brain development,
the more the environment is important
like sensory information, right? Like
cognitive development, think about motor
behavior afterwards. But especially at
early stages of development, everything
is quite well regimented and goes
according to a calendar. Nobody knows
what the clock is. So nobody knows what
the molecular mechanism of it is, but it
is somewhere in the cells. It's
something that is counting somehow time.
And that's why it's such a great time to
do neuroscience.
like more people should like come and
and do that. So where where do these
cells derive their energy from? Because
it's you know you talk about a clock,
there's not a battery in the back. What
is powering this? Cuz they're outside of
they're outside of the body. They've not
got the the whole human system to back
it up. So we feed them sort of like a
you know a soup of chemicals that is
made sort of like in the lab. So we like
we provide them glucose, right? I mean
they need glucose and some of the amino
acids and we give them lipids, right?
And so they need fats. And so we just
like have we call them cell culture
media. And and how do you measure if and
when they are expressing their
prescribed function? Cuz a neuron has a
very specific function. Absolutely. How
do how do you know that they are
actually expressing that function? So we
do all kind of things like first of all
we just look to see very often you know
cells I mean not very often all the time
cells have a signature you know they
express a certain combination of genes
and so generally the first question is
if you think you've made a cortical
neuron let's say a neuron from the outer
layer of the brain how do you know that
it's a cortical neuron well first of all
you kind of like look at what genes it
expresses and you compare it with what
we know from a neuron in the actual
brain then you can look at how it looks
They're often neurons in the cortex have
sort of like a pyramidal shape. We call
them parameal neurons. So you look Do
they look pyramidal? Pyramal. That means
like a pyramid. Yeah, exactly.
Pyramidal. Okay. For me, parameal. Yeah.
I guess they really look like a a tiny
pyramid. Yeah. An inverted pyramid. Like
that's how they sit in the cortex. So
you look at this like the shape of the
of the cell body. Or the other thing is
sometimes they move in very specific
ways. And that's actually how the first
assemblids were actually looking at how
cells are moving. So here here's an
interesting fact. You know, you may
think that, you know, you have all the
cell types in the brain, right? But
they're all made, you know, when you
build a brain, they're all made sort of
like in their place and then they sit
there. Actually, it's more an, you know,
a rule rather than an exception that
cells do not reside in the place in
which they're born in the brain. So
there is a lot of movement. So think
about the cortex, okay? like the outer
layer of the brain. It has neurons that
are exciting other neurons and it has
neurons that are inhibiting other
neurons. And there is a very good
balance between the two of them. Too
much excitation, you get epilepsy,
right? So, you know, think about that.
Now, here's the interesting thing. All
the excitatory neurons are born there in
the cortex. But all the neurons that are
inhibitory are built in a deep part of
the brain. And literally during brain
development they start moving crawling
for inches and for many many months
until they arrive into the cortex and
then they kind like establish that
balance. So in order for you to build
that cortex it's not enough just to make
the excitatory cells you have to make
the inhibitory cells. But then the
question is how do they come together?
How do they assemble? because that's
where the name assemblid came and
essentially the vision was like almost
you know 12 years ago was let's make
these two parts of the brain the one
that makes the excitatory neurons and
the one that makes the inhibitor neurons
and then just put them close to each
other and hopefully the cells will know
what to do because we certainly don't
know how to guide them to um to to move
and it turns out that exactly what they
do you put them together and these
gabbergic cells immediately start like
they have this processes the cellar
processes is they start like smelling
where the cortex is and they literally
start jumping. You know you see the
cells they literally spend 3 hours they
look in that direction and then they
make a jump 40 microns then they wait
for another 3 hours kind like smell
where the cortex is make another jump
and this process has never really been
seen in humans. This happens in the
third trimester of life but this is this
is what's going on in every developing
human being what you're describing. So,
professor, what you're saying is
basically we have uh a bunch of cells
that uh are in a field and they they're
looking and they recognize one another
and then they just start running to each
other in slow motion. Well, pretty much
pretty much because they really come
with instructions of how to do this and
I think that's what happens in
development and that's why you build a
brain. I mean our brains may be a little
bit different from each other but in the
grand scheme of things they're quite the
same, right? I mean we have the same
structures. It's not like, you know, you
have a phalamus in the spinal cord,
right? We all have pretty much in the
same position. So, in order for, you
know, the brain to build itself that
way, there are these remarkable forces
that bring all the cells together over
and over again every time you build a
human brain. Wow. I Okay, this is the
last thing. I'm sorry. I know we got to
move on to the next subject, but here's
what is like percolating in my brain
right now. Is this once you kind of
perfect this technology, would you be
able to then introduce these cells and
have them go in and let's say for
instance, repair a part of my brain that
kind of makes me so stupid I don't
believe in climate change or something.
Well, this sort of like a self assembly
actually works really well early in
development in the sense that all the
cells are open to like connecting with
the others. But then it turns out that
the as you progress in development, the
cells become less and less permissive.
We don't have cells moving in our brain
right now. Okay? You know, it's just not
very adaptive. So the challenge is that
if you start to add the cells into an
adult, like those circuits are already
formed. So it's not that easy. Got you
know um to the dumbass circuitry. The
dumbass circuitry is fully formed and
very very strong. Right. However, if if
you're able prenatal to identify brain
disorders or any disorder in a child,
you might be able during the gestation
process to go in and and and make uh
changes. Exactly. And that's exactly
what we're do actually even early after
birth because the human brain develops
for like years even after we're born.
That's amazing. So, professor that that
that's amazing. All right. So,
professor, you did some work and some
research with cells and you said you
work with autism patients and the like
and there's something called Timothy
syndrome which is autism and epilepsy
which seems a terrible combination to to
terrible for Timothy. Damn. Yeah. But
you then afflicted cells with this
Timothy syndrome. Is that correct? Yeah.
and then reverse engineered how you
could find a way to work with and do
basically what you said take that away
right is that could I mean I am
explaining that at all well but m you
probably could do it better than I if
you would so I mean this this goes back
to like you know the previous point when
we were talking about how the stem cells
were so like discovered and what the
potential was so the question was if you
really want to model a disease you know
you want to model a complex disease such
as autism them uh and epilepsy you know
where do you actually start I mean
psychiatric disorders are mysterious
disorder we still don't know how like
this you know thoughts and this complex
social behavior arises in the brain so
actually we thought we would start with
genetics because one thing that we do
know about many of these
neurodedevelopmental disorders is that
they're caused by mutations they're
caused by very severe mutations right so
there's this rare rare syndrome I mean
literally there about we found about 30
40 patients in the English speaking
world today very few but they have a
mutation this patient in a protein that
is actually a channel for calcium in the
cells every time a neuron communicates
with another neuron it opens up these
channels lets calcium in and it
essentially translates electrical
information into chemical information
inside the cell. So it turns out that
these patients have one single letter
mutation in their entire genome. one
single letter that makes this channel
open for a little bit longer. That's it.
It's not all the time open. It's not,
you know, just slightly longer. So, the
idea was that if you were to model this
disease, you could make neurons from
these patients, then look at them and
actually monitor calcium inside the
cells. And if we were to see more
calcium, it means that we started
modeling the disease. And that's exactly
what we did because we wanted to really
ascertain that we were really studying a
disease process that is relevant. So if
if you know the actual letter and when
you you're talking about that you're
talking about the DNA sequencing. So if
you know the actual letter, why not do
something like crisper where you just go
in and snip out the letter? Well, sadly
you would have to change it everywhere
in the brain probably. There you go. And
that and that is not you know doable
today. Okay. And these patients are very
severely affected. I mean they'll have
epilepsy. They'll have autism spectrum
disorder. They have a heart problem. So
many of them would die because of a
heart problem. And so that's that's
where we sort of like started with with
cells from these patients. And then with
this models that I've told you now over
the past 15 years, we kept building the
models to be more complex and try to
understand this disease. And first we
understood how calcium gets into the
cells. Then we saw that the cells are
not moving right. They're not connecting
properly. And about three years ago,
which was, you know, one of the most
interesting, you know, times in in sort
of like my academic life, was at one
point we just accumulated enough
information about the disease that
essentially the therapeutic just became
self-evident, so to speak. You just like
look at it and they would say, "Oh, oh,
this makes sense. This is what we need
to do." And so, I don't want to go into
the details of how we've then does, but
it it has to do with how this gene is
processed inside the cells. We've done a
screen and essentially identify a tiny
piece of a nucleic acid that if you add
to cells goes right into them, changes
the channel and essentially restores
almost every single defect that we've
discovered over the past 15 years. Damn.
Just like within, you know, a couple of
days. This is insane. I know. But that's
what you're talking about. These are
Sherlock Holmes. This is real detective
work to work out that that is exactly
what's necessary. I mean, you said it
was obvious, but obviously it wasn't.
Otherwise, someone would have seen it a
long time ago. So, if you were around in
Frankenstein's day, Frankenstein would
could just been a regular Joe on the
street. Yeah. He would have walked out
instead of like he would have been like,
"Hey, what's going on? How you guys
feeling?
Are you mapping this with sort of an AI
technology? I mean, Chris's one tool,
but there are others out there. Is that
what it is, or is this just the
empirical evidence from experiment?"
It's large largely empirical. I mean
we've just you know just accumulated
enough information about the biology
that at one point it became clear and
it's quite interesting if you think
about it because this is could be the
first psychiatric disease that has been
exclusively understood with this human
stem cell models meaning by studying it
by studying human brain cells outside of
the body of those patients right and so
of course the question is like how do
you actually you know know that it would
work you know generally what we do is we
use an animal model for the disease
right? um you have an animal model, you
have a mouse that has the same mutation.
Well, it turns out that if you do this
mutation in a mouse, it doesn't really
recapitulate aspects of disease. It
doesn't work that well. So now what do
you do? You can also just go straight
into a patient. You want to make sure
that sort of like it it works sort of
like in an invivo setting. And so that's
why one of the things that we've done
over the past years is actually also
develop transplantation methods. Meaning
that while the organ and the assemblies
that we've been building are rather
complex, they still don't receive
sensory input. They don't mature to the
same level. So what we started doing is
actually transplanting them. Meaning we
essentially take the organoid that we've
made in a dish, but now we put it into
the brain of a rat. And then if you do
it early in development, then the rat
can actually grow to have about a third
of a hemisphere to be made out of human
cells. You can literally see it on an
MRI. And you may think well this is you
know why would you even do that
experiment? Well the reason is because
now we actually have human tissue from
patients in a living organism and you
can test a drug. So what we did is we
took the drug that we tested in vitro in
a dish but then injected it into the rat
the way you would do into a patient but
then we looked at the effect on human
cells making sure that it doesn't kill
human cells right or it doesn't do
something else. So that is like one way
that allows us actually to test
therapeutics in a way that is like safe
essentially. So the thing is if you want
to solve the issues of complex brain
disorders, you're going to need more
complex assemblids. Mhm. Now you've
taken this assemblid up a notch, have
you not? um daisy chained four organoids
together but then gone down the path of
sensory if you could sort of expand on
that for us because I think this is
absolutely fascinating. You're telling
me they have feelings. Is this what
you're telling me? No, let the professor
explain. No, you know, I mean it turns
out that if you if you think about like
brain disorders, you know, some of them
are sort of like hardware defects,
right? I mean parts are just missing.
Think about in a stroke, right? you like
you know you lose like parts of the
cortex but most disorders that we
consider today psychiatric autism
schizophrenia we think of them more as
like disorders of software of
communication between the cells. So it
becomes really clear that if you really
want to capture those processes outside
of the human body we sort of like need
to reconstruct those circuits outside.
And so this started like you know maybe
five six years ago when we thought could
we actually build a circuit that is
actually has an output you know really
easy to measure. So we decided to
reconstruct the cortical spinal pathway.
So that means and you you you know this
really well everybody knows this this is
like biology textbook information. You
have a neuron in the cortex that
generally goes all the way to the spinal
cord makes a connection or a syninnapse
with the spinal cord neuron and that
spinal cord neuron goes to muscle. You
have essentially three neurons, two
connections. You stimulate the cortical
neuron, information goes down to the
spinal cord to the muscle, the muscle
contracts, right? You know, it's as easy
as like text of biology. So, we thought,
could we actually reconstruct this? You
may think that it's easy, but here is we
don't know how the cells find each other
in development. By the way, we have no
ideas about the rules. So, what we did
is we made an organoid that resembles
the cortex, one that resembles the
spinal cord, and then we made a ball of
human muscle from a biopsy. You can get
a biopsy of muscle, build it as a ball,
and then we put them all three together.
And it turns out that once you do this,
those specialized neurons in the cortex,
not every cortical neuron, but the ones
that really go to the spinal cord start
to leave the cortex, find the motor
neurons, then the motor neurons leave
and find the muscle, and then the three
preparation starts to contract. Wow.
That that would that was a three-part
assemblid. All right. And that that told
us that even you know against the odds
because the probabilities for the cells
to find each other is very very low. And
yet this works beautifully and you can
actually stimulate the cortex and you
get beautiful muscle contractions and
we've been using this uh you know really
in the last years to identify for
instance how polio virus and other non-p
polio viruses actually affect the spinal
cord and cause paralysis which is very
difficult uh to study otherwise. So it
is a very important so like preparation
you can add this polio virus and you can
cause a paralysis of that circuit uh in
a dish. This work is not yet published,
but it tells you like just how useful a
preparation like this uh can be. It's
beyond useful. I mean, I'm what I'm
trying to figure not figure out envision
is a time where we've mapped like
everything, right? So, you have you have
the layout. Now, would there be a time
because of what you're saying that we'll
be able to go in identify in a child
that is developing in the womb and then
uh identify mutations and then take the
assemblides, put them into the child and
have those mutations corrected before
the child is born. Is that the deal?
Perhaps even an easier scenario for that
is that have a mutation. You know that
the patient will have a serious
mutation. You build an assembly that
models the disease of that patient
without using the patient brain. So like
an avatar if you want, right? I mean
that's what an assembly is if you think
about it, right? It's an avatar for that
circuit simplified in a dish. You test
the drug or you screen for drugs. Maybe
you want to screen quickly for drugs,
right? And then you use that in a
patient. So now you can do that for
every single patient. You don't have to
actually uh do the process in any
particular patient because now you
developed a drug for the mutation
itself. Now just boom boom boom every
single person with that mutation gets
that drug delivered and and that's how
you Wow, that's amazing. But to get
there, we do need to get a better
understanding of how cuz you you see
we're quite why do wait why do you have
to understand why the cells do what they
do? They're doing it. You already know.
Why do you have to? Are you just that
news scientist?
That's right. Cuz he's a Look at Look at
Neil. Neil's looking at me like, "How
dare you?" He's a scientist. How dare
you? We don't accept just what is. I
understand. Go please. No, if you
actually think about like Richard Feman,
he famously said, and I'm sure you know
this, that what I cannot create, I do
not understand. M and you know if you
think a little bit about this right if
we cannot recreate the circuits outside
it's going to be difficult for us to
understand and if we don't understand
the biology all the breakthroughs in
medicine that came over the last decades
think about cancer in children right in
the 60s 90% lethal today less than 10%
lethal why this entire revolution
molecular biology right because the
tissue of interest was accessible you
get the blood of these patients in
leukemia or the tumor, you bring it to
the lab and you deploy the power of
molecular biology. We in psychiatry and
neurology are really the last ones
because we cannot access the brain. So
my belief is that as we gain access to
the brain through this methods and
others non-invasively, we're going to be
able to deploy the power of molecular
biology and make breakthroughs in
molecular, you know, psychiatry and
neurology as we've done in, you know,
uh, cardiology and other branches of
medicine. That's that's sort of like how
I see it, but I may be wrong. But
haven't you got an assemblid now that's
like I said a four stage assemblid, but
you've worked it so as it's sensory and
you can feel the understanding of pain
and then how that becomes hyper
sensitivity or to the point where people
do not feel pain at all. Oh. Oh, okay. I
thought you meant like they're going to
have that little vial of just screaming
in the middle of the night.
Why did you give me pain? Not that one.
No, you're you're right that one of the
things that we're trying actually this
this just came out. I mean, we made the
first assemblid in like 2017. It took us
three years to make from go from
two-part assemblids to three-part
assemblids, the one with the motor that
I was explaining. And then it took us
another five years to get to four part
assemblies just because it's technically
more and more complicated. And this is
the pathway that senses, you know, sends
your information. So, think about it. If
you, you know, want to sense anything,
even a painful stimulus on a finger, you
have nerve terminals that are coming
from neurons that sit close to the
spinal cord, they have receptors that
sense that. Then they send that
information to the spinal cord. The
spinal cord shoots that information up
to the phalamus in the middle of the
brain and the phalamus sends it to the
cortex and then you sense that something
happened. You know, that's how it works.
So what we did is essentially we tried
to reconstruct that from part. So we
made neurons that have some of these
receptors including receptors for pain.
So you know the receptors for pain
actually respond to capsain you know red
hot chili pepper that's why it's like so
hot. So they have this specialized
receptors and you add capsain and they
just beautifully respond like
electrically. But this had never been
witnessed before had it. No I mean to
put the entire circuit together has
never really been done before. Now the
biology for you to to witness this the
first ever time. Well, the most
beautiful part of it was to be honest
once we made the parts which took us
years you know the four parts of the
circuit and then put them together and
it takes about a 100 days to make them
by the way and then another 100 days for
the cells to connect with each other and
then at one point we started like
looking at them and seeing like what's
going on and we've discovered something
you know really remarkable the cells in
the circuit become synchronized with
each other. Mhm. So initially they were
all sparkling you know in a
non-coordinated way and then at one
point the activity just seems to be
starting on one side and it goes you
know one
unidirectional. So the circuit is almost
you know and there's no stimulus by the
way you know the it's almost like which
we know also from brain development that
the brain prepares itself before it even
receives sensory inputs for what is
about to come. It's almost like
practicing. So it's practicing to add
you know the stimulus and then the
relevance for pain is that there are
this interesting maybe you've heard
about this neurologist discovered them
you know in the past 20 years there are
these patients that have mutations that
make them either completely insensitive
to pain so they literally feel no pain
and it's really caused by a mutation in
a channel in a sodium channel or they
have the opposite they have this channel
hyper sensitive so they're hyper
sensitive to pain both of them are
obviously very had. So now what we did,
we used crisper cuz we were talking
about crisper before and genetically
modified the cells in a dish to have the
mutations that are present in patients.
Then put them together all four and
started watching to see what happens.
And in the patients that have that hyper
sensitivity to pain, they're very
sensitive to pain. You just see the
information going really really fast.
The cells are super active and they
sense it. But in the ones that have no
pain, it's not like there's no activity
at all. Actually what we found is
there's a lack of coordination right the
cells are essentially like lost that
coordination. So that's why it's so
important to have the parts because
really at the end of the day you know
the brain is more than the sum of its
parts obviously and so clearly in order
to understand some of these disorders
we're going to need to have some of
these parts put together to get this
emergent new properties not feeling pain
well that's the new that's the Novacane
movie isn't it? Yeah, but you know that
I mean we see this in certain people
that Okay, I remember we did on on the
TV show and Neil has this crazy thing.
He could stick his hand in water, ice
water. I'm not and I'm not saying it
right. Take a bunch of ice, add water to
it, and it actually becomes colder than
freezing. Okay. Yes. All right. Then you
put your hand in it and it burns your
hand. So, we did an experiment and I
stuck my hand in and he stuck his hand
in and literally my hand started burning
in what a normal person would have their
hand burn. And then he was able to leave
his hand in there for a god awful amount
of time to the point where this you were
squealing at the time. Well, yes, I was
because it burned. It It was not cool.
So, not literally burned cuz it's cold,
not hot, right? It not literally burned,
but it felt like it was burning. Okay.
But for you, for some reason, and you
know, I just chocked it up to he got a
lot more fat on his hands to get
But seriously, it's a matter of
sensitivity to pain. No. Absolutely. No,
it's not. No. What is it? I I didn't say
I didn't feel the pain. It's just that I
could deal with it. Yeah. Oh,
well, that just changes. Oh, no. No. So,
okay. So, so explain to me the mind over
matter aspect here. Yeah, and that's a
great point actually cuz you see this is
not the only pathway for pain. It turns
out that we have at least two pathways
in the brain. One of them allows you to
tell there is a painful stimulus. You
know I sense it, it's on my finger or my
hand is in the water, not my feet,
right? That's the one that tells you
that. And then there is a second pathway
that actually leverage other brain
regions, the amygdala, the singlet
cortex that tell you that that is really
bad. It gives you the unpleasant
feeling, the emotional component of
pain. And you know they're interesting.
There are patients who dissociate
between the two. So there are patients
who let's say have a stroke or a tumor
in the insula or in the singulate
cortex. And you'll have these patients
and they'll tell you you know I know
you're uh you know you're hurting like
my finger and I can tell you that it is
my finger but it doesn't feel unpleasant
at all. So these pathways are
dissociated in the brain. Now in the
work that we've done, we've
reconstructed the basic pathway that
just processes pain stimuli, not the
emotional component. So we wouldn't say
that they're feeling pain in any way.
Right? Just to make it clear cuz as you
can imagine there are all kind of other
ethical issues that are arising from
like most of the work that we do
obviously because you know we want our
models to be closer to the human brain
because we think that many of the
psychiatric disorders are uniquely human
and yet the more the closer they are to
the human brain the more uncomfortable
we feel right so I think it's so like
mitigating this risk moving forward that
I think is very important how how do you
now having had this experience with with
the sense sensor aspect of it. Reverse
engineer again the way to get a drug to
alleviate the hyper sensitivity to pain.
Sure. I mean there are many ways that
you can do this. So like now think about
it's God's guide. Well no everybody
everybody everybody's got a thing with
opioids but there must there must be a
mechanism there where opioids use that
you can sort of tag on to but not get
that addictive part. Exactly. And think
about it like it's it's sad that the
best the best treatment that we have for
like pain comes out of like poppy seeds
and was discovered thousands of years
ago by chance, right? I mean essentially
piggybacks on this circuit does not come
from a deep understanding of the circuit
itself. Of the circuit, don't you make
opium from poppy seeds? Yes. Okay. I
just want to clarify that. Yeah. So I
think the the idea now is that we have
the circuit in a dish. You can add
opioids by the way and see how they
modulate this and see okay this is what
opioids do to the circuit but let's now
try to do the same thing in a different
way right right one that is sort of like
you know driven by the biology behind it
and I think that that's the beauty of it
that is a beauty and by the way uh
professor if you ever get to that place
please email me right before you make
that public because I would like to be
the first
investor in the pain-free opiate that is
nonaddictive because that is I mean
that's the that's the end of the game
right there. And just to be clear,
Chuck, what cuz when my hand was I just
want to like get back to my hand in the
bucket. Yeah. Okay. Long ago, right,
when I began wrestling in high school
and I was going to bring this up. I
think it's because you were an athlete
and athletes have to deal with pain all
the time. Exactly. And I judge by
looking at the situation. Is this pain
something that will cause irreparable
damage or is it just simply pain? Okay.
And I'm looking at my hand is in a
bucket of ice. Yeah, it hurts, but who
cares? But who cares? I'm not going to
get frostbite from it. Okay. So, see,
you and Gary have that, I'm sure, cuz
Gary's had a ton of surgeries. He's
played in pl in pain. He sat in ice
after games, right? See, and I have not
played none of that. I've done none of
that. And this is you. That's why you
whimped out in the time of need because
this is how pain works for me. Okay. The
way pain works for me is I experience it
and then my brain, my body, and
everything in my soul goes, "Jesus, no.
Please, Lord, no." So, oh, that's
what Okay.
So when when you're saying you you're
building these avatars and the detective
work that comes, are you finding more
clues and more answers or are you just
finding clues and then we got to sit
there, scratch our heads and hopefully
come up with an answer or is this really
empowering the sort of psychiatric
research that you're interested in? You
know, the way I look at it is, you know,
psychiatric disorders have been a
mystery like no doubt. I mean, how does
complex behavior or hallucination arises
from the brain been mesmerizing us for
such a long time? And it's almost like,
if you were to think about it, it's
almost as like seeing uh, you know,
Egyptians writing for the first time,
right? You look at them, you know, where
do you even start? I mean, they're
beautiful drawings. You know, you could
classify them based on like the animals,
but then you can't make sense of what
the meaning is. And you see that's why
you know if you think about it like
historically the discovery of the
Rosetta stone right like this tiny piece
tablet that for the first time had
euroglyphs on one side and Greek writing
on the other one right and then you know
this French scientist who came with
Napoleon finds this starts looking at it
and that becomes essentially the you
know enabling tool suddenly we could
actually see what word does what and you
know cool thing about the Rosetta Stone
it's like a shopping list or something
It's like it's not any deep. It's like
bread and eggs.
I don't know if it's exactly a shopping
list, but it's something completely
mundane. Very well. Something really
trivial. Absolutely. And and yet like it
was the only writing that we know that
had a both on both sides. So I think the
question is we need to somehow translate
at one point. So like this mental
processes that are so complex into what
we can deal with which is really
molecular biology. That's what we can
control. Molecular biology we can
control. So I I I think you know to a
large extent I've I've seen this like
the the mission you know for my lab and
in general like I think for the
community more broadly is really to try
to translate some of this complex
phenomena of the brain in very simple
processes calcium in a neuron you know
two neurons connecting with each other
and then hopefully by doing that and
finding ways of reversing it those will
also reverse or at least improve. Well,
we don't know that, you know, we we, you
know, that has not yet been done and uh,
you know, we'll have to see whether the
clinical trial will actually be
successful. I mean, we're preparing for
a clinical trial for tim syndrome right
now. We're still like in the last stages
of preparation. We found most of the
patients uh in the world. We're building
a special unit here at Stanford where
we're going to be hopefully bringing
them in the next year or so and doing
the clinical trial. So, we'll see. And
then, you know, this is the first
disease. I mean uh and I I look at
Timothy syndrome as so like really being
the first first but we have half a dozen
of other conditions that we've been
studying from various angles really I
mean I see this this is going to be the
golden uh age for human neuroscience and
I'm delighted to learn that you're
putting in this much effort for a
disease that is so rare. Yeah. I mean
think about that. So the rarity at least
the people have the benefit of your
attention given to it rather than
someone just making the costbenefit
analysis and saying we're not we're not
doing anything we're not going there
we're not going down that road right are
we are we saying here that your
assemblid research and work is going to
be the key to understanding what has
been hidden brain biology. How soon do
you think maybe you really will be able
to not just tick off the Timothy
syndrome but take on other horrific
diseases? Oh, we're already working on
others. Uh I mean, you know, at least
half a dozen we've been studying like
some are associated with epilepsy, some
with intellectual disability. We have a
few forms of schizophrenia. So, we've
been deploying this like systematically.
And another thing that we've done to be
honest and this is sort of like being in
the spirit of what we do at Stanford is
uh you know I lead a a center here and
in the beginning it was you know there
were so when we published some of the
first methods everybody was like oh you
know can we come to the lab and learn
how to do it like we want to do it too
and we brought people here initially but
then at one point you know we couldn't
train enough people so we actually
started doing literally courses where we
bring students from all over the world
from various labs and for about a week
almost like in a cooking show if you to
think about it right because you know
the experiments are done before we just
show them these are the critical steps
that you need to do and so we've been
helping more than 300 labs around the
world to um you know implement these
methods and if the breakthrough is not
going to come from my lab
therapeutically speaking that's fine
because it will probably come from
somebody else somewhere like you know in
a corner of Europe or who knows of South
America doing experiments on a rare form
of disease and finding a therapeutic
that would be fine I think because
there's so much to do for you know one
in four individuals is suffers from a
psychiatric disease today. Right. Right.
It's a huge burden. Are we going to come
across a situation where you are going
to have you'll be faced with building an
assemblid or creating an assemblid that
will just be too complex? Is there a
limit to what you can assemble? There
there are absolutely limits to what we
can assemble. And you know while like
many of the features of this assembllet
are really fascinating and surprising
you know they still have a lot of
limitations you know I mean they're not
vascularized they don't receive blood uh
supply we we may be able to stimulate
them with like capsain or something else
but they're not receiving the rich
sensory information that is important
you know think about the you know if uh
if you have a a kitten where you you
know you cover one eye if you cover that
eye for a week uh that cat will never
see with that eye You do it in an adult
cat for a week, no problem whatsoever.
So early in development, if some of the
circuits do not receive the right input,
they won't develop properly. So you know
again while our models are relatively
complex already they lack a lot of the
complexity and you know is as as as
George uh box famously said that all
models are wrong or some are useful you
know and the models that we make are not
our goal is not to make a perfect model
of the brain it's like to make a good
enough model of a part of a brain or of
a circuit that will give us the
breakthrough therapeutically I wouldn't
be so harsh with the term model there I
would say all models are almost by
construct incomplete, right? But that
wouldn't make them wrong necessarily.
They're just they're not the whole
story. That's why they're a model.
That's why they're a model. Otherwise,
it would be the exact thing. You
wouldn't need it. You wouldn't need a
model if you could replicate the exact
thing. It would be the thing itself,
right? Okay. Yeah. I just love that
Assemblids sounds like a Cartoon Network
show. Like Assembly's Weekdays at 3,
right after Transformers, you know.
Actually, it turns out that there is a
game there. There is a video game for it
which I didn't know when I put out the
term but there is a very popular video
game that is literally called
assembllet. Cool.
Where do we hit the ethical wall and hit
the regulatory and all the other things
and uh did you say regulatory?
I did this America Jack it's regulatory.
Regulatory.
Not even regul regulatory. I didn't come
here regulatory lecture on geography. I
know it's America.
That's America, Jack. He was saying, you
know, we we think about this like all
the time. Honestly, in the beginning,
obviously, there are like not that many
ethical issues, but as we've progressed,
it becomes clear that we have to think
carefully. So, there are like, you know,
the way the way I think of it is like in
multiple levels like on one hand there
are like issues about the cells. These
are human cells that we're using. Yeah.
You know, who owns the cells? You have
to give consent for this experiments to
be done. And we do that all the time.
And so we always have to put that into
the context of like what are we doing
with the cells what the cells were
consented for. That's very much like uh
who is the woman who Lax, what's her
name? Lax. Lax. Yes. Whose cancer cells
were whose cells were for decades and
saved and created many breakthroughs in
cancer and the family got nothing and
and she never gave permission. So it's
good to know you're doing that and
that's why it's critical every time we
Henry Henry adelax yes you know the the
patients or you know who you know the
parents in the case if they're minors
will actually be clearly informed about
what will happen with the cells uh how
the cells will be shared with others for
instance under what conditions and so on
so forth so on one hand there are like
this issues about the cells then
sometimes as as you know we're using
animals so sometimes we transplant this
into the animal so we also have to think
about the welfare of an animal I mean
you transplant and more is the animal
suffering in any way. And then the third
problem which is perhaps the more like
philosophical in a way is like are there
any new emerging properties like are
there um you know features complex
features that are arising from this that
would make one thing that we need to
regulate this field currently I think
the models that we have in vitro are not
sufficiently complex to
justify you know the presence of any
complex features like that's why we
don't use the term generally you know
the term intelligence for is because
intelligence is really a property of an
organism. It involves like goal-
directed behavior. It involves learning.
None of our cultures do that and using
you know anthropomorphizing it's not
generally a very useful thing to do in
this case but as the models become more
complex we have to start having these
conversations and that's why you know
last year we had an aillmore meeting uh
which is like this historic place here
in California you may have heard where
many of these ethical discussions have
started in biology in the 70s when
cloning gene cloning was so like
discovered and everybody was like what
is going to happen we're now modifying
finding these genes and we're going to
create new organisms. So scientists got
together there with philosophers uh you
know with journalists. So that's what
we've we're also doing now. We're
getting together a larger group and
thinking what are some of the
implications you know sociologically,
religiously, philosophically while at
the same time thinking that psychiatric
disorders are a huge burden and if you
have a technology that has the potential
to change that to provide cures is it
you know unethical not to use it right I
mean there's even that argument you know
where you know how far do we go uh in
that so that those are like ongoing
discussions I mean it's been really
interesting. I spend more and more of my
time uh as part of this conversations.
Let me take you just one other place
before we land the plane here. You came
into this as an expert in the autism
spectrum patients and a new term that's
been bandied about for the last
certainly 10 years is the the concept of
neurodeiversity.
When you look at it that way, who is
anyone to say that someone needs repair
if they're simply manifesting on a
spectrum of
neurodeiversity? Your counterparts not
long ago would have labeled
homosexuality as a mental disorder in
need of repair. And only recently been
historical times recently was that
removed from the list of humanities
maladies and disorders. So there's an
ethical another ethical frontier about
what it is you judge needs repair versus
just another kind of person. And that's
absolutely one of the discussions that
we've been having, one of the ethical
discussions that we've been having. And
you know all psychiatric disorders are
on a spectrum with the population and
some of them are more severe and some of
them are less severe and that's also the
case for autism. You know autism is
certainly a a spectrum but what we're
focusing on is actually what we now call
profound autism. This is the autism that
is really debilitating. So patients with
timothy syndrome or like some of the
other patients that were like with other
disorders can have 60 seizures a day. Oh
my really that's just they are unable to
make any eye contact. They need a
caregiver for the rest of their life.
You know the biggest fear that a parent
has when they have you know a child is
like what if I die? So I am seeing it
through the eyes of some of these
parents that are dealing with like
really the devastating forms of autism
what we call profound autism. Mhm. And
then of course there is like what you
mentioned which are neurotypical or uh
you know aspect of how we interact with
each other that do not require any
nobody wants to cure or to provide
treatments for anybody but this patients
are severely affected. Most patients
with psychiatric disorders are severely
affected. So I once asked Oliver Saxs
who is a friend of our show uh we have
some archival content with him. Oh
that's amazing. Yeah. Yeah. I I asked
him after a public talk that he gave if
you could go back in time and carry with
you a pill that would cure your own
ailments. Uh he had sort of certain
neuro issues. Uh he has correct me on
the word here. Progno plagnasia.
Yes, he did. Yeah. He couldn't really
identify. Yeah. He had he had face
blindness. Okay. Oh wow. And and some
other elements to it. I sometimes wish I
had that. Right. So, so I asked him if
you could take a pill that would just
cure that back when you were 17, would
you? Looking back at that time and he
said no because it was that those
differences in the way his mind worked
that got him interested in neuroscience
in the first place. That is that was his
destiny. Mhm. But but you see that's
exactly you know the point where we
started like the beauty of like building
a nervous system is that while there is
a basic plan that makes our brains the
same we pretty much you know can do the
same things. It also creates a lot of
diversity. Even monozygotic twins right
have the same genetic uh uh you know
material. They share the same womb.
Yeah. And then they can have different
sexual orientations. You know they like
they have different hobbies. They have
different fingerprints if I remember
correctly, don't they? They do. They do.
Yes. Wow. Because again there is a lot
of stochastic forces in development and
those are the those are the ones that
make us different and that's how
evolution actually works too you know by
selecting these differences that I mean
to a large extent probably that's what
made us as a species so successful.
Yeah. Uh the fact there is always an
individual who has a vision who wants to
go and you know discover a new
continent. Yeah. So I I think that's the
power of our species. And I think I I
know very few honestly psychiatrists or
neurologists who would want to cure that
or change that. Right. Right. I think
what we're dealing really on the field
is really this devastating conditions
that make essentially most of these
children unable to really function as as
adults or as children. So this is a very
human humanentric view. So if you were
the the co virus, you would say, "Let's
invent humans who then have airplanes so
that we can cross continents and infect
other people." Absolutely.
They are the true owners of this planet.
That's right. Let's be honest. Viruses.
They're true owners of this planet.
Microbes. We're just an Uber. Yeah,
that's micro. We're just an Uber ride.
Uber ride. Well, Sergio, it's been a
delight to have you on Star Talk sharing
your expertise with us and taking time
out of what we know is your busy
research schedule to give us a little
glimpse into what you're doing in your
lab. Just congratulations to you and all
the people who work in your lab who are
surely working there right now while
you're talking to us. Oh, they are right
here behind me. Yeah. Yeah. And really,
they're the ones that are doing all the
work. I mean you know this work I mean
hopefully it came through from the
discussions but this experiments are
long. I mean they last hundreds of days
because human development it takes a
long time. So it requires a lot of
dedication and I but I I think the
promise of what this could yield
ultimately you know understanding the
human brain is you know is addictive. So
you know you really want to figure this
out. Well uh thank you again. I'd like
to reflect on this with a brief cosmic
perspective if I may please.
This moving neuroscience frontiers got
me
thinking. You look at the progress of
civilization. It always comes about when
we have the proper match between a
tool and a
goal. And when they come
together, we build things that didn't
exist
before. Or we disassemble things that
had never been taken apart before.
But in all cases, it has to do with the
precision of the tools you bring to the
task and to learn what's going on on the
frontier of
neuroscience. It feels to me that it's
finally catching up with the methods and
tools that have shaped engineering
throughout the history of civilization.
engineers
built dams and buildings and and
aqueducts and everything that we value
and care about in our modern
lives. But the time has come to care
about what's going on inside our brain
within our mind. And I'm delighted to
learn that that is a frontier that
finally has tools befitting the task.
Welcome to the
club
neuroscience and that is a cosmic
perspective. Keep looking up.
[Music]